---
title: "Opal 0.9.2: direct JS calls, console.rb, numeric updates, better reflection, and fixes aplenty"
date: 2016/01/13
author: Jared White
---

Opal is now officially on the 0.9.x release path, having just released [0.9.2](https://github.com/opal/opal/compare/v0.8.1...v0.9.2). Thanks to all the [contributors to Opal](https://github.com/opal/opal/graphs/contributors?from=2015-04-30&to=2016-01-13&type=c), especially over the holidays, and we're excited for what the new year will bring to the Opal community. Some highlights from the latest release:

### Direct calling of JavaScript methods

You can now make direct JavaScript method calls on native JS objects using the `recv.JS.method` syntax. Has support for method calls, final callback (as a block), property getter and setter (via `#[]` and `#[]=`), splats, JavaScript keywords (via the `::JS` module) and global functions (after `require "js"`).

Some examples, first a simple method call:

```ruby
# javascript: foo.bar()
foo.JS.bar
foo.JS.bar()
```
<!--preview-->
Arguments just like Ruby, with or without parentheses:

```ruby
# JavaScript: foo.bar(1, "a")
foo.JS.bar(1, :a)
foo.JS.bar 1, :a
```

Argument splats (doesn't that Ruby just look great?):

```ruby
# JavaScript: ($a = foo).bar.apply($a, [1].concat([2, 3]))
foo.JS.bar(1, *[2, 3])
foo.JS.bar 1, *[2, 3]
```

Properties work too!

```ruby
# JavaScript: foo["bar"]
foo.JS[:bar]

# JavaScript: fooarr[2]
fooarr.JS[2]
```

That's just the beginning, and should prove to be a great new way to write down-to-JS-level code without interrupting the flow of your Ruby code. [Read the in-depth documentation here](http://opalrb.org/docs/guides/v0.9.2/compiled_ruby.html) (scroll down to the **Calling JavaScript Methods** section).

### Console wrapper added to the stdlib

Requiring the new console wrapper will make available the `$console` global variable. [Check out the docs here](http://opalrb.org/docs/api/v0.9.2/stdlib/Console.html). Example:

```ruby
require 'console'
$console.log a: 1, b: {c: 3}
```

_Note:_ Be advised that `Kernel#pp` no longer forwards arguments directly to `console.log`.

### Updates to Numeric, Complex, and Rational

`Numeric` semantics are now compliant with Ruby, and both `Complex` and `Rational` have been fully implemented.

### Better reflection, exception handling, and method_missing-powered operators

Some updates to Ruby reflection support to allow for deeper metaprogramming abilities. These all are now working: `method_added`, `method_removed`, `method_undefined`, `singleton_method_added`, `singleton_method_removed` and `singleton_method_undefined`.

Improvements to exception handling as well: `Exception#exception`, `Exception::exception`, `Exception#message`, and `Exception#to_s` are fully implemented.

Operator methods (e.g. `+`, `<`, etc.) can be handled by `method_missing`. _Note:_ always be aware of possible performance penalties when not using Opal's optimized operators.

### Bug fixes and more!

As always, Opal 0.9.2 includes many bug fixes and improvements to the internals of the Opal libraries, so be sure to [read the changelog](https://github.com/opal/opal/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#092---2016-01-10) for further details (as well as information on changes throughout [the 0.8.x releases](https://github.com/opal/opal/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#081---2015-10-12) if you didn't see those previously).
